---
layout: post
title:  "Identifying Cortex Cells By Spatial Transcriptomics"
author: Kalen C
jhed: kclifto2
categories: [ EC ]
image: homework/extra_credit/kalenclifton_extra.png
featured: false
---


Expression of 483 genes has been measured in 42519 cells in a segment of brain tissue via MERFISH. Each cell position in the tissue sample has also been recorded. Fluorescence intensity has been lognormalized by cell such that each data point is the log10(count) of transcripts for a gene if the total number of transcripts for all genes in that cell was  1 million. To display the data in low dimensional space, tSNE was performed on the first twenty-five principle components from doing PCA on the gene expression matrix. The embedding was then used as variables to group cells by kmeans clustering into ten clusters. The clusters have been visualized on the low dimensional embeddings (Figure A). Additionally, cells were plotted as they appear positionally in the tissue sample and labeled by cluster membership (Figure B). Cells in cluster 8 seem unique in both placement in the tissue and position in tsNE embedding so that cluster was chosen for further analysis (Figure C).  Two-sided Wilcox tests were perfomred for each gene to determine if it was differentially expressed bewteen cells in cluster 8 and all other cells. Genes that had statistically signifcant differential expression (adjusted p-value < 0.05) were selected to be inlcuded in a volcano plot with the axes being log2(fold change) and -log10(p-value).  Genes that were upregulated in cluster 8 and had the lowest p-values were identified (Figure D).  Boxplots were created to show differential expression across the ten clusters for these upregulated genes (Figure E). Drd5 (Dopamine Receptor D5) is reported in literature to be "anatomically localized to the cortex, hippocampus and limbic system." (ref 1) The limbic system includes structure such as the amygdala, thalamus, hypothalamus, basal ganglia, and cingulate gyrus.  Npy2r (Neuropeptide Y2 receptor) is "widespread in the human central nervous system with particularly dense regions in the hypothalamus and the hippocampus." (ref 2) Similarly, HTR4 is "highly expressed in the central nervous system, particularly in limbic structures." (ref 3)

References:
1. https://www.psychiatrictimes.com/view/dopamine-receptors-human-brain
2. https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:432641/FULLTEXT01.pdf
3. https://respiratory-research.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1465-9921-14-77




```{r}


```


